README.md, before:

# OndbMongoose SDK

OndbMongoose SDK is a [Oracle NoSQL DB](https://www.oracle.com/database/nosql/) object modeling tool designed to work in an asynchronous environment. OndbMongoose works with [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/) 22+. OndbMongoose is modeled after [Mongoose](https://mongoosejs.com/), using the same API and adds functionality to allow executing native Oracle NoSQL DB queries.

## Installation

First install [Node.js](http://nodejs.org/) and [Oracle NoSQL DB](https://www.oracle.com/database/technologies/nosql-database-server-downloads.html), then:

```sh
$ npm install ondbmongoose
```

Note: For examples in the ./examples dir to work npm link must be used. See https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v8/commands/npm-link or below under Dev Instalation.

### Dev instalation

When developing the OndbMongoose SDK use the following installation steps:

Clone from GitHub (requires git):
```sh
  $ git clone ssh://git@bitbucket.oci.oraclecorp.com:7999/nosql/nosql-mongoose-sdk.git ondbmongoose
  $ cd ondbmongoose
```

Install dependencies (requires NodeJS >= 22 and npm >= 10.8, if behind proxy use additional npm arg: --proxy=http://www-proxy:80):
```sh
  $ npm install
```

Run tests, must have a Oracle NoSQL DB instance (kvlite and proxy) running on http://localhost:8080:
```sh
  $ npm test
```

Run a single test:
```sh
  $ node ./node_modules/mocha/bin/mocha.js --require ts-node/register test/main.test.ts
```

Localy link the ondbmongoose npm package:
```sh
  $ npm link
```

Run examples, must have a Oracle NoSQL DB instance (kvlite and proxy) running on http://localhost:8080:
```sh
  $ cd examples/typescript
  $ npm link ondbmongoose
  $ npm start
  
  $ cd ../javascript
  $ npm link ondbmongoose
  $ npm start
```

Or run them all, tests and examples:
```sh
  $ cd ../..
  $ npm run all
```

## Documentation

The official documentation website is [TBD](http://github.com/).

## Examples

### Importing

```javascript
// Using Node.js `require()`
const ondbmongoose = require('ondbmongoose');

// Using ES6 imports
import ondbmongoose from 'ondbmongoose';
```

### Overview

#### Connecting to Oracle NoSQL DB

First, we need to define a connection. If your app uses only one database, you should use `ondbmongoose.connect`. If you need to create additional connections, use `ondbmongoose.createConnection`.

Both `connect` and `createConnection` take a connection string `nosqldb://` URI.

```js
await ondbmongoose.connect('nosqldb+on_prem_http://127.0.0.1:8080/');
```

Once connected, the `open` event is fired on the `Connection` instance. If you're using `ondbmongoose.connect`, the `Connection` is `ondbmongoose.connection`. Otherwise, `ondbmongoose.createConnection` return value is a `Connection`.

**Note:** _If the local connection fails then try using 127.0.0.1 instead of localhost. Sometimes issues may arise when the local hostname has been changed._

**Important!** OndbMongoose buffers all the commands until it's connected to the database. This means that you don't have to wait until it connects to Oracle NoSQL DB in order to define models, run queries, etc.

#### Defining a Model

Models are defined through the `Schema` interface.

```js
const Schema = ondbmongoose.Schema;
const ObjectId = Schema.ObjectId;

const BlogPost = new Schema({
  author: ObjectId,
  title: String,
  body: String,
  date: Date
});
```

Aside from defining the structure of your documents and the types of data you're storing, a Schema handles the definition of:

* [Validators](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/validation.html) (async and sync)
* [Defaults](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api/schematype.html#schematype_SchemaType-default)
* [Getters](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api/schematype.html#schematype_SchemaType-get)
* [Setters](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api/schematype.html#schematype_SchemaType-set)
* [Indexes](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/guide.html#indexes)
* [Middleware](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/middleware.html)
* [Methods](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/guide.html#methods) definition
* [Statics](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/guide.html#statics) definition
* [Plugins](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/plugins.html)
* [pseudo-JOINs](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/populate.html)

The following example shows some of these features:

```js
const Comment = new Schema({
  name: { type: String, default: 'hahaha' },
  age: { type: Number, min: 18, index: true },
  bio: { type: String, match: /[a-z]/ },
  date: { type: Date, default: Date.now },
  buff: Buffer
});

// a setter
Comment.path('name').set(function (v) {
  return capitalize(v);
});

// middleware
Comment.pre('save', function (next) {
  notify(this.get('email'));
  next();
});
```

Take a look at the [`example`](./examples/typescript/demo-ondbmongoose.ts) for an a detailed usage.

#### Accessing a Model

Once we define a model through `ondbmongoose.model('ModelName', mySchema)`, we can access it through the same function

```js
const MyModel = ondbmongoose.model('ModelName');
```

Or just do it all at once

```js
const MyModel = ondbmongoose.model('ModelName', mySchema);
```

The first argument is the _singular_ name of the collection your model is for. **OndbMongoose automatically looks for the _plural_ version of your model name.** For example, if you use

```js
const MyModel = ondbmongoose.model('Ticket', mySchema);
```

Then `MyModel` will use the __tickets__ collection, not the __ticket__ collection. For more details read the [model docs](https://mongoosejs.com/docs/api/mongoose.html#mongoose_Mongoose-model).

Once we have our model, we can then instantiate it, and save it:

```js
const instance = new MyModel();
instance.my.key = 'hello';
instance.save(function (err) {
  //
});
```

Or we can find documents from the same collection

```js
MyModel.find({}, function (err, docs) {
  // docs.forEach
});
```

You can also `findOne`, `findById`, `update`, etc.

```js
const instance = await MyModel.findOne({ ... });
console.log(instance.my.key);  // 'hello'
```

For more details check out [the docs](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/queries.html).

**Important!** If you opened a separate connection using `ondbmongoose.createConnection()` but attempt to access the model through `ondbmongoose.model('ModelName')` it will not work as expected since it is not hooked up to an active db connection. In this case access your model through the connection you created:

```js
const conn = ondbmongoose.createConnection('your connection string');
const MyModel = conn.model('ModelName', schema);
const m = new MyModel;
m.save(); // works
```

vs

```js
const conn = ondbmongoose.createConnection('your connection string');
const MyModel = ondbmongoose.model('ModelName', schema);
const m = new MyModel;
m.save(); // does not work b/c the default connection object was never connected
```

#### Embedded Documents

In the first example snippet, we defined a key in the Schema that looks like:

```
comments: [Comment]
```

Where `Comment` is a `Schema` we created. This means that creating embedded documents is as simple as:

```js
// retrieve my model
const BlogPost = ondbmongoose.model('BlogPost');

// create a blog post
const post = new BlogPost();

// create a comment
post.comments.push({ title: 'My comment' });

post.save(function (err) {
  if (!err) console.log('Success!');
});
```

The same goes for removing them:

```js
BlogPost.findById(myId, function (err, post) {
  if (!err) {
    post.comments[0].remove();
    post.save(function (err) {
      // do something
    });
  }
});
```

Embedded documents enjoy all the same features as your models. Defaults, validators, middleware. Whenever an error occurs, it's bubbled to the `save()` error callback, so error handling is a snap!


#### Middleware

See the [docs](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/middleware.html) page.

##### Intercepting and mutating method arguments

You can intercept method arguments via middleware.

For example, this would allow you to broadcast changes about your Documents every time someone `set`s a path in your Document to a new value:

```js
schema.pre('set', function (next, path, val, typel) {
  // `this` is the current Document
  this.emit('set', path, val);

  // Pass control to the next pre
  next();
});
```

Moreover, you can mutate the incoming `method` arguments so that subsequent middleware see different values for those arguments. To do so, just pass the new values to `next`:

```js
.pre(method, function firstPre (next, methodArg1, methodArg2) {
  // Mutate methodArg1
  next("altered-" + methodArg1.toString(), methodArg2);
});

// pre declaration is chainable
.pre(method, function secondPre (next, methodArg1, methodArg2) {
  console.log(methodArg1);
  // => 'altered-originalValOfMethodArg1'

  console.log(methodArg2);
  // => 'originalValOfMethodArg2'

  // Passing no arguments to `next` automatically passes along the current argument values
  // i.e., the following `next()` is equivalent to `next(methodArg1, methodArg2)`
  // and also equivalent to, with the example method arg
  // values, `next('altered-originalValOfMethodArg1', 'originalValOfMethodArg2')`
  next();
});
```

##### Schema gotcha

`type`, when used in a schema has special meaning within OndbMongoose. If your schema requires using `type` as a nested property you must use object notation:

```js
new Schema({
  broken: { type: Boolean },
  asset: {
    name: String,
    type: String // uh oh, it broke. asset will be interpreted as String
  }
});

new Schema({
  works: { type: Boolean },
  asset: {
    name: String,
    type: { type: String } // works. asset is an object with a type property
  }
});
```

### Driver Access

OndbMongoose is built on top of the [Oracle NoSQL DB NodeJs SDK](https://github.com/oracle/nosql-node-sdk). Each model keeps a reference to a [native Oracle NoSQL DB SDK table](https://oracle.github.io/nosql-node-sdk/pages/tables.html). The table object can be accessed using `YourModel.collection`. However, using the collection object directly bypasses all ondbmongoose features, including hooks, validation, etc. The one
notable exception that `YourModel.collection` still buffers
commands. As such, `YourModel.collection.find()` will **not**
return a cursor.

### API Docs

Find the API docs [here](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api/mongoose.html).

### Related Projects

#### Node SDK for Oracle NoSQL DB 

- [nosql-node-sdk](https://github.com/oracle/nosql-node-sdk/)


## Help

* Open an issue in the [Issues](https://github.com/oracle/TBD/issues) page
* Post your question on the [Oracle NoSQL Database Community](https://forums.oracle.com/ords/apexds/domain/dev-community/category/nosql_database).
* [Email to nosql\_sdk\_help\_grp@oracle.com](mailto:nosql_sdk_help_grp@oracle.com)

When requesting help please be sure to include as much detail as possible,
including version of the SDK and **simple**, standalone example code as needed.

## Contributing

This project welcomes contributions from the community. Before submitting a pull request, please [review our contribution guide](./CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Security

Please consult the [security guide](./SECURITY.md) for our responsible security vulnerability disclosure process

## License

Copyright (c) 2024 Oracle and/or its affiliates.

Released under the Universal Permissive License v1.0 as shown at
<https://oss.oracle.com/licenses/upl/>.

The [THIRD\_PARTY\_LICENSES](THIRD_PARTY_LICENSES.txt) file contains third
party notices and licenses.

Commit message:

Changed debug to logLevel in connect options param, for user to configure what details are logged. Added comments for major methods. Cleaned up unusefull comments.

README.md, after:

# OndbMongoose SDK

OndbMongoose SDK is a [Oracle NoSQL DB](https://www.oracle.com/database/nosql/) object modeling tool designed to work in an asynchronous environment. OndbMongoose works with [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/) 22+. OndbMongoose is modeled after [Mongoose](https://mongoosejs.com/), using the same API and adds functionality to allow executing native Oracle NoSQL DB queries.

## Installation

First install [Node.js](http://nodejs.org/) and [Oracle NoSQL DB](https://www.oracle.com/database/technologies/nosql-database-server-downloads.html), then:

```sh
$ npm install ondbmongoose
```

Note: For examples in the ./examples dir to work npm link must be used. See https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v8/commands/npm-link or below under Dev Instalation.

### Dev instalation

When developing the OndbMongoose SDK use the following installation steps:

Clone from GitHub (requires git):
```sh
  $ git clone ssh://git@bitbucket.oci.oraclecorp.com:7999/nosql/nosql-mongoose-sdk.git ondbmongoose
  $ cd ondbmongoose
```

Install dependencies (requires NodeJS >= 22 and npm >= 10.8, if behind proxy use additional npm arg: --proxy=http://www-proxy:80):
```sh
  $ npm install
```

Run tests, must have a Oracle NoSQL DB instance (kvlite and proxy) running on http://localhost:8080:
```sh
  $ npm test
```

Run a single test:
```sh
  $ node ./node_modules/mocha/bin/mocha.js --require ts-node/register test/main.test.ts
```

Localy link the ondbmongoose npm package:
```sh
  $ npm link
```

Run examples, must have a Oracle NoSQL DB instance (kvlite and proxy) running on http://localhost:8080:
```sh
  $ cd examples/typescript
  $ npm link ondbmongoose
  $ npm start
  
  $ cd ../javascript
  $ npm link ondbmongoose
  $ npm start
```

Or run them all, tests and examples:
```sh
  $ cd ../..
  $ npm run all
```

## Documentation

The official documentation website is [TBD](http://github.com/).

## Examples

### Importing

```javascript
// Using Node.js `require()`
const ondbmongoose = require('ondbmongoose');

// Using ES6 imports
import ondbmongoose from 'ondbmongoose';
```

### Overview

#### Connecting to Oracle NoSQL DB

First, we need to define a connection. If your app uses only one database, you should use `ondbmongoose.connect`. If you need to create additional connections, use `ondbmongoose.createConnection`.

Both `connect` and `createConnection` take a connection string `nosqldb://` URI.

```js
await ondbmongoose.connect('nosqldb+on_prem_http://127.0.0.1:8080/');
```

Once connected, the `open` event is fired on the `Connection` instance. If you're using `ondbmongoose.connect`, the `Connection` is `ondbmongoose.connection`. Otherwise, `ondbmongoose.createConnection` return value is a `Connection`.

To enable logging to get insight into what query OndbMongoose SDK generates use the option logLevel, with one of values: NONE 0, SEVERE: 1, WARNING: 2, INFO: 3, CONFIG: 4, FINE: 5, FINNER: 6.

```js
await ondbmongoose.connect('nosqldb+on_prem_http://127.0.0.1:8080/', {logLevel: 3});
```

**Note:** _If the local connection fails then try using 127.0.0.1 instead of localhost. Sometimes issues may arise when the local hostname has been changed._

**Important!** OndbMongoose buffers all the commands until it's connected to the database. This means that you don't have to wait until it connects to Oracle NoSQL DB in order to define models, run queries, etc.

#### Defining a Model

Models are defined through the `Schema` interface.

```js
const Schema = ondbmongoose.Schema;
const ObjectId = Schema.ObjectId;

const BlogPost = new Schema({
  author: ObjectId,
  title: String,
  body: String,
  date: Date
});
```

Aside from defining the structure of your documents and the types of data you're storing, a Schema handles the definition of:

* [Validators](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/validation.html) (async and sync)
* [Defaults](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api/schematype.html#schematype_SchemaType-default)
* [Getters](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api/schematype.html#schematype_SchemaType-get)
* [Setters](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api/schematype.html#schematype_SchemaType-set)
* [Indexes](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/guide.html#indexes)
* [Middleware](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/middleware.html)
* [Methods](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/guide.html#methods) definition
* [Statics](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/guide.html#statics) definition
* [Plugins](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/plugins.html)
* [pseudo-JOINs](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/populate.html)

The following example shows some of these features:

```js
const Comment = new Schema({
  name: { type: String, default: 'hahaha' },
  age: { type: Number, min: 18, index: true },
  bio: { type: String, match: /[a-z]/ },
  date: { type: Date, default: Date.now },
  buff: Buffer
});

// a setter
Comment.path('name').set(function (v) {
  return capitalize(v);
});

// middleware
Comment.pre('save', function (next) {
  notify(this.get('email'));
  next();
});
```

Take a look at the [`example`](./examples/typescript/demo-ondbmongoose.ts) for an a detailed usage.

#### Accessing a Model

Once we define a model through `ondbmongoose.model('ModelName', mySchema)`, we can access it through the same function

```js
const MyModel = ondbmongoose.model('ModelName');
```

Or just do it all at once

```js
const MyModel = ondbmongoose.model('ModelName', mySchema);
```

The first argument is the _singular_ name of the collection your model is for. **OndbMongoose automatically looks for the _plural_ version of your model name.** For example, if you use

```js
const MyModel = ondbmongoose.model('Ticket', mySchema);
```

Then `MyModel` will use the __tickets__ collection, not the __ticket__ collection. For more details read the [model docs](https://mongoosejs.com/docs/api/mongoose.html#mongoose_Mongoose-model).

Once we have our model, we can then instantiate it, and save it:

```js
const instance = new MyModel();
instance.my.key = 'hello';
instance.save(function (err) {
  //
});
```

Or we can find documents from the same collection

```js
MyModel.find({}, function (err, docs) {
  // docs.forEach
});
```

You can also `findOne`, `findById`, `update`, etc.

```js
const instance = await MyModel.findOne({ ... });
console.log(instance.my.key);  // 'hello'
```

For more details check out [the docs](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/queries.html).

**Important!** If you opened a separate connection using `ondbmongoose.createConnection()` but attempt to access the model through `ondbmongoose.model('ModelName')` it will not work as expected since it is not hooked up to an active db connection. In this case access your model through the connection you created:

```js
const conn = ondbmongoose.createConnection('your connection string');
const MyModel = conn.model('ModelName', schema);
const m = new MyModel;
m.save(); // works
```

vs

```js
const conn = ondbmongoose.createConnection('your connection string');
const MyModel = ondbmongoose.model('ModelName', schema);
const m = new MyModel;
m.save(); // does not work b/c the default connection object was never connected
```

#### Embedded Documents

In the first example snippet, we defined a key in the Schema that looks like:

```
comments: [Comment]
```

Where `Comment` is a `Schema` we created. This means that creating embedded documents is as simple as:

```js
// retrieve my model
const BlogPost = ondbmongoose.model('BlogPost');

// create a blog post
const post = new BlogPost();

// create a comment
post.comments.push({ title: 'My comment' });

post.save(function (err) {
  if (!err) console.log('Success!');
});
```

The same goes for removing them:

```js
BlogPost.findById(myId, function (err, post) {
  if (!err) {
    post.comments[0].remove();
    post.save(function (err) {
      // do something
    });
  }
});
```

Embedded documents enjoy all the same features as your models. Defaults, validators, middleware. Whenever an error occurs, it's bubbled to the `save()` error callback, so error handling is a snap!


#### Middleware

See the [docs](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/middleware.html) page.

##### Intercepting and mutating method arguments

You can intercept method arguments via middleware.

For example, this would allow you to broadcast changes about your Documents every time someone `set`s a path in your Document to a new value:

```js
schema.pre('set', function (next, path, val, typel) {
  // `this` is the current Document
  this.emit('set', path, val);

  // Pass control to the next pre
  next();
});
```

Moreover, you can mutate the incoming `method` arguments so that subsequent middleware see different values for those arguments. To do so, just pass the new values to `next`:

```js
.pre(method, function firstPre (next, methodArg1, methodArg2) {
  // Mutate methodArg1
  next("altered-" + methodArg1.toString(), methodArg2);
});

// pre declaration is chainable
.pre(method, function secondPre (next, methodArg1, methodArg2) {
  console.log(methodArg1);
  // => 'altered-originalValOfMethodArg1'

  console.log(methodArg2);
  // => 'originalValOfMethodArg2'

  // Passing no arguments to `next` automatically passes along the current argument values
  // i.e., the following `next()` is equivalent to `next(methodArg1, methodArg2)`
  // and also equivalent to, with the example method arg
  // values, `next('altered-originalValOfMethodArg1', 'originalValOfMethodArg2')`
  next();
});
```

##### Schema gotcha

`type`, when used in a schema has special meaning within OndbMongoose. If your schema requires using `type` as a nested property you must use object notation:

```js
new Schema({
  broken: { type: Boolean },
  asset: {
    name: String,
    type: String // uh oh, it broke. asset will be interpreted as String
  }
});

new Schema({
  works: { type: Boolean },
  asset: {
    name: String,
    type: { type: String } // works. asset is an object with a type property
  }
});
```

### Driver Access

OndbMongoose is built on top of the [Oracle NoSQL DB NodeJs SDK](https://github.com/oracle/nosql-node-sdk). Each model keeps a reference to a [native Oracle NoSQL DB SDK table](https://oracle.github.io/nosql-node-sdk/pages/tables.html). The table object can be accessed using `YourModel.collection`. However, using the collection object directly bypasses all ondbmongoose features, including hooks, validation, etc. The one
notable exception that `YourModel.collection` still buffers
commands. As such, `YourModel.collection.find()` will **not**
return a cursor.

### API Docs

Find the API docs [here](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/api/mongoose.html).

### Related Projects

#### Node SDK for Oracle NoSQL DB 

- [nosql-node-sdk](https://github.com/oracle/nosql-node-sdk/)


## Help

* Open an issue in the [Issues](https://github.com/oracle/TBD/issues) page
* Post your question on the [Oracle NoSQL Database Community](https://forums.oracle.com/ords/apexds/domain/dev-community/category/nosql_database).
* [Email to nosql\_sdk\_help\_grp@oracle.com](mailto:nosql_sdk_help_grp@oracle.com)

When requesting help please be sure to include as much detail as possible,
including version of the SDK and **simple**, standalone example code as needed.

## Contributing

This project welcomes contributions from the community. Before submitting a pull request, please [review our contribution guide](./CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Security

Please consult the [security guide](./SECURITY.md) for our responsible security vulnerability disclosure process

## License

Copyright (c) 2024 Oracle and/or its affiliates.

Released under the Universal Permissive License v1.0 as shown at
<https://oss.oracle.com/licenses/upl/>.

The [THIRD\_PARTY\_LICENSES](THIRD_PARTY_LICENSES.txt) file contains third
party notices and licenses.
